DOCSP-42774: transactions (#63)
mongodb/docs-mongoid: source/interact-data/transaction.txt

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use {+odm+} to perform
**transactions**. Transactions allow you to perform a series of operations
that change data only if the entire transaction is committed.
If any operation in the transaction does not succeed, the driver stops the
transaction and discards all data changes before they ever become
visible. This feature is called **atomicity**.

In MongoDB, transactions run within logical **sessions**. A
session is a grouping of related read or write operations that you
want to run sequentially. Sessions enable causal consistency for a group
of operations and allow you to run operations in an **ACID-compliant**
transaction that meets an expectation of atomicity, consistency,
isolation, and durability. MongoDB guarantees that the data involved in
your transaction operations remains consistent, even if the operations
encounter unexpected errors.

In {+odm+}, you can perform transactions by using the following APIs:

- :ref:`mongoid-txn-high-level`: {+odm+} manages the life cycle of the
  transaction. You can use this API in {+odm+} v9.0 and later.

- :ref:`mongoid-txn-low-level`: You must manage the life cycle of the

>   transaction. You can use this API in {+odm+} v6.4 and later.

Author: I'll get a clarification on this

The :ref:`mongoid-txn-session` section describes how to make changes to
your data from within a session without performing a transaction.

.. _mongoid-txn-high-level:

Higher Level API
----------------

You can start a transaction by calling the ``transaction()`` method on
an instance of a model, on the model class, or on a ``{+odm+}`` module.

When you call the ``transaction()`` method, {+odm+} performs the
following tasks:

1. Creates a session on the client.

#. Starts a transaction on the session.

#. Performs the specified data changes.

> #. Commits the transaction if no errors occur or ends the transaction if

Author: Yes, this is the terminology used for committing the data changes to MongoDB

>    there is an error. See the :ref:`` section to learn more an

Author: oops

#. Closes the session.

If your transaction is committed, {+odm+} calls any ``after_commit``
callbacks for all objects modified inside the transaction. If there is
an error and the transaction is rolled back, {+odm+} calls any
``after_rollback`` callbacks for all objects modified inside the

> transaction.

Reviewer: S: link to callbacks section

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/transaction.rb
   :start-after: start-txn-operations
   :end-before: end-txn-operations
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

Client Limitations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Only operations on the same client are in scope of a transaction,
because each transaction is attached to a specific client. Ensure
that you use objects from same client inside the transaction method
block.

The following example defines model classes that use different clients
and demonstrates how operations are run based on the origin client:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/transaction.rb
   :start-after: start-different-clients
   :end-before: end-different-clients
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

.. note::
   
   When you call the ``transaction()`` method on the ``{+odm+}`` module,
   {+odm+} creates the transaction by using the ``:default`` client.

Ending Transactions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Any exception raised inside the transaction method block ends the
transaction and rolls back changes. Usually, {+odm+} displays the
exception, except for the ``Mongoid::Errors::Rollback`` exception. Implement
this exception in your application to explicitly end the transaction

> without passing on an exception.

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused on this exception. A couple questions that come up for me:
- What is the difference between it and other exceptions that also end transactions and roll back changes? 
- Does it only happen when explicitly implemented? 
- What does "without passing on an exception" mean?

Author: It seems like raising this error would be useful for a situation where you check for a certain condition and if its not met, you want the transaction to be aborted and changes to be rolled back. You want this to happen "silently" ie without erroring and seeing a specific error. I am reading the API docs and will try to reword.

Callbacks
~~~~~~~~~

This transaction API introduces the ``after_commit`` and
``after_rollback`` callbacks.

{+odm+} triggers the ``after_commit`` callback for an object that was
created, saved, or deleted in the following cases:

- After the transaction is committed if the object was modified inside
  the transaction.

- After the object is persisted if the object was modified before
  the transaction block.

The ``after_commit`` callback is triggered only after all

> other callbacks are executed successfully. Therefore, if an object is
> modified without a transaction, it is possible that the object was
> persisted, but the ``after_commit`` callback was not triggered, for
> example, if {+odm+} raised an exception in the ``after_save`` callback.

Reviewer: S to split up sentences and present tense. Also, could you provide a reference for ``after_save``?
```suggestion
other callbacks are executed successfully. Therefore, if an object is
modified without a transaction, it is possible that the object is
persisted, but the ``after_commit`` callback is not triggered. For
example, if {+odm+} raises an exception in the ``after_save`` callback, 
the ``after_commit`` callback will not be triggered because [blablabla].
```

The ``after_rollback`` callback is triggered for an object that was
created, saved, or deleted inside a transaction if the transaction was
ended. {+odm+} never triggers ``after_rollback`` outside of a transaction.

.. _mongoid-txn-low-level:

Lower Level API
---------------

When using the lower level API, you must create a session before
starting a transaction. You can create a session by calling the
``with_session()`` method on a model class or an instance of a model.

Then, you can start a transaction by calling the ``start_transaction()``
method on a session, as shown in the following code:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/transaction.rb
   :start-after: start-lower-lvl-api
   :end-before: end-lower-lvl-api
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

You can specify a read concern, write concern or read
preference when starting a transaction by passing options to the
``start_transaction()`` method:

.. code-block:: ruby

   session.start_transaction(
       read_concern: {level: :majority},
       write_concern: {w: 3},
       read: {mode: :primary}

>    )

Reviewer: is there any API documentation for what options you can use here?

When using this API, you must manually commit or end the transaction.
You can use the ``commit_transaction()`` and ``abort_transaction()``
methods on the session instance to manage the transaction lifecycle:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/transaction.rb
   :start-after: start-commit-abort
   :end-before: end-commit-abort
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

.. note::

   If a session ends and includes an open transaction, the transaction is
   automatically ended.

You can retry the transaction commit if it fails,

> as shown in the following code: 

Reviewer: S: brief description that the transaction commit is retried on ``UNKNOWN_TRANSACTION_COMMIT_RESULT_LABEL`` exception

   :end-before: end-commit-retry
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

Client Behavior
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To perform operations within a transaction, operations must use the same
client that the session was initiated on. By default, all operations
are performed by using the default client.

To explicitly use a different client, use the ``with()`` method: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/transaction.rb
   :start-after: start-other-client
   :end-before: end-other-client
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

.. _mongoid-txn-session:

Perform Data Operations in a Session
------------------------------------

You can use sessions in {+odm+} in a similar way that you can
perform a transaction. You can call the ``with_session()`` method on a
model class or on an instance of a model and perform some operations in
a block. All operations in the block will be performed in the context of
single session.

The following limitations apply when using sessions:

- You cannot share a session across threads. Sessions are not thread-safe.

- You cannot nest sessions. You cannot call the ``with_session()``
  method on a model class or a model instance within the block passed to

>   the ``with_session()`` method on another model class or model instance.

Reviewer: S: This sentence is a bit hard to untangle, but breaking it up might be difficult. Could you maybe provide a code example of what not to do?

- All model classes and instances used within the session block must use
  the same driver client. For example, if you specify different
  ``storage_options`` for another model used in the block than those of the
  model or instance that you called ``with_session()`` on, {+odm+} returns

>   an error.

Reviewer: S: add a reference for storage_options

Author: changed the wording to be more specific to the erroring case

Examples
~~~~~~~~

> You can use the ``with_session()`` on a model class and pass it session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the ``with_session()`` method on a model class and pass it session
```

> options to perform a block of operations in the context of a session.

Reviewer: Is there any API documentation for the different session options it can take?

The following code enables the ``causal_consistency`` option when

> creating a session, then performs data operations:

Reviewer: S: add a brief description of what this option does

In MongoDB, transactions run within logical **sessions**. A
session is a grouping of related read or write operations that you
want to run sequentially. Sessions enable causal consistency for a group
of operations, which means that all processes in your application agree on
the order of causally-related operations.

Sessions allow you to run operations in an **ACID-compliant**
transaction that meets an expectation of atomicity, consistency,
isolation, and durability. MongoDB guarantees that the data involved in
your transaction operations remains consistent, even if the operations
encounter unexpected errors.

In {+odm+}, you can perform transactions by using either of the
following APIs:

- :ref:`mongoid-txn-convenient`: {+odm+} manages the life cycle of the
  transaction. You can use this API in {+odm+} v9.0 and later.

- :ref:`mongoid-txn-core`: You must manage the life cycle of the
  transaction. You can use this API in {+odm+} v6.4 and later.

The :ref:`mongoid-txn-session` section describes how to make changes to
your data from within a session without performing a transaction.

.. _mongoid-txn-convenient:

> Convenient Transaction API

Reviewer 2: The term "Convenient Transaction API" refers to  the [drivers API](https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/blob/master/source/transactions-convenient-api/transactions-convenient-api.md). It can be used in Mongoid like this (but this it probably not the best idea):

```ruby
person.with_session do |session|
  session.with_transaction do
    person.save!
  end
end
```

Maybe we should not using this term to avoid confusion.

Author: Reverted the terminology to use high-level and low-level

is not met without raising an exception message.

.. _mongoid-txn-callbacks:

Callbacks
~~~~~~~~~

This transaction API introduces the ``after_commit`` and
``after_rollback`` callbacks.

{+odm+} triggers the ``after_commit`` callback for an object that was
created, saved, or deleted in the following cases:

- After the transaction is committed if the object was modified inside
  the transaction.

- After the object is persisted if the object was modified before
  the transaction block.

The ``after_commit`` callback is triggered only after all
other callbacks are performed successfully. Therefore, if an object is
modified outside of a transaction, it is possible that the object is then
persisted, but the ``after_commit`` callback is not triggered. This
might occur, for example, if {+odm+} raised an exception in the
``after_save`` callback because this callback must complete successfully
to trigger ``after_commit``.

The ``after_rollback`` callback is triggered for an object that was
created, saved, or deleted inside a transaction if the transaction was
ended. {+odm+} never triggers ``after_rollback`` outside of a
transaction.

> .. TODO link to callbacks guide.

Author: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongoid/current/reference/callbacks/
for now - we will standardize later in this project

  code demonstrates a nested session that results in an error:

  .. code-block:: ruby

     Book.with_session(causal_consistency: true) do
       # Nesting sessions results in errors
       Film.with_session(causal_consistency: true) do
         ...
       end
     end

- All model classes and instances used within the session block must use
  the same driver client. For example, if you specify different
  a different client for a model used in the block than those of the
  model or instance that you called ``with_session()`` on, {+odm+} returns
  an error.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

You can use the ``with_session()`` method on a model class and pass it session
options to perform a block of operations in the context of a session.

The following code enables the ``causal_consistency`` option to
guarantee the order of operations when creating a session on the
``Book`` model, then performs data operations:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/transaction.rb
   :start-after: start-model-session
   :end-before: end-model-session
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

To learn more about the available session options, see the

> :ruby-api:`Session class constructor details

Author: Note: API links are broken until the next snooty parser release see https://github.com/mongodb/snooty-parser/pull/633
